When I was working at Etsy, I benefited from a very robust A/B testing system. Etsy had been doing A/B testing for more than 6 years (see a great and still relevant 2012 presentation from Dan McKinley, former Principal Engineer, on designing for [continuous experimentation](http://mcfunley.com/design-for-continuous-experimentation). By the time I left, Etsy's in-house experimentation system, called Catapult, had more than 5 data engineers working on it fulltime. Every morning, I was greeted with a homepage that listed all the experiments that had ever run at Etsy. When you clicked on one, you got a summary of the experiment (usually written by the product manager). Numbers for all the key metrics, such as conversion rate, add to cart rate, and number of visitors in each condition were already calculated. You could easily add any event that happened on the site and get those rates calculated too. You got to see the % change from the control to treatment with it's accompanying p-value and how many days until we had 80% power to detect a change. We even had beautiful little confidence intervals that changed color based on whether they overlapped with zero! 

And yet sometimes I would spend a majority of my time working on experiments, even though I tried to never be working on more than 3 or 4 at once. How could that take so long when so much was already done for me? The concept of A/B Testing seems pretty simple. A classic example is you change the color of a button and measuring if the click-rate changes. Assuming your assignment of visitors and data collection is working, all you need to do is run a proportion test, right? And if you already have the proportion test calculated, why is a data scientist even needed? 

### Basic A/B Testing Rules

1) **Have one key metric for your experiment** (e.g. click through rate, conversion rate, etc). You can (and should!) monitor more metrics to make sure you don’t accidentally tank them, but you should have one as a goal. Revenue is probably the **wrong** metric to pick. It is likely a very skewed distribution which makes traditional statistics tests behave poorly. See my discussion in [my A/B testing talk](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SF-ryGgLOgQ) (around the 23 minute mark). 

2) **Use that key metric do a power calculation**. You'll input what the current rate of that metric is, how many visitors you get daily, what type of change you’re aiming to get (1% increase? 5%?), the percentage of people you’ll be allocating to your new version (e.g. are you doing 50/50 or 75/25 split), desired level of power (usually 80%) and the significance threshold (usually .05), and you can get how long you need to run this experiment for. If you’re doing a proportion metric, [experimentcalculator.com](experimentcalculator.com) is good for this. 
  
   Two things will generally happen: 1) you'll get that it will take a few days or weeks or 2) you'll get that it will take 3  years, 5 months, and 23 days. If the latter happens, you may either have to go for a different metric with a higher baseline  rate or decide you only care about bigger changes (e.g. “I’m ok that we can’t measure if we increase clicks by 1% because  only a 10% or greater increase is meaningful). If you want to learn more about power, check out Julia Silge's [excellent  post](https://juliasilge.com/blog/ab-testing/), which includes a [shiny app](https://juliasilge.shinyapps.io/power-app/) for  seeing how your power level changes with your effect size and population.

3) **Run your experiment for the length you’ve planned on**. Monitor it in the first few days to make sure nothing exploded. But plan on running it for the length you said. Don’t stop as soon as something is significant or you will get a lot of false positives. See the review section in Dave Robinson's Bayesian A/B Testing [blog post](http://varianceexplained.org/r/bayesian-ab-testing/). 

4) **Confidence intervals are more important than the p-value**. They have a 1-1 relationship such that if the p-value is less than .05, the 95% confidence interval does not overlap with 0. But if the confidence interval is wide and very close to zero, you’ve got a lot less evidence of a change than if it’s tiny and far away. 

5) **Don't run tons of variants**. You will lower your ability to detect a statistical effect, as each group will have fewer people in it, and raise the likelihood of a false positive if you simply test the control against each treatment group. 

6) **Don't try to look for differences for every possible segment** (e.g. did we help US visitors? new visitors? visitors on Saturday?). You'll again have false positive problems. You also probably won't be powered to detect changes either. 

7) **Check that there's not bucketing skew** (also known as sample ratio mismatch). This is where the split of people between your variants does not match what you planned. For example, maybe you wanted to split people between the control and treatment 50/50 but after a few days, you find 40% are in the treatment and 60% in the control. That's a problem! If you have lots of users, even a difference of a couple thousand can indicate a problem with your set-up. To check if you have an issue, run a [proportion test](https://www.medcalc.org/calc/test_one_proportion.php) and check your p-value. 

8) **Don't overcomplicate your methods**. Maybe you have engineers who've read about [multi-armed bandit testing](http://stevehanov.ca/blog/index.php?id=132), stats nerds who want to use Bayesian methods, or product managers who want the key metric to be a complicated sequence of behaviors. If you're just starting out A/B testing methods, focus on getting the basic, frequentist methods right. Even after a few years, it usually is better to invest in experiment design and education rather fancy statistical methods. 

9) **Be careful of launching things just because they "don't hurt"**. There may actually be a negative change that's too small to detect.  

10) **Have a data scientist/analyst involed in the whole process.** As Sir R. A. Fisher once said “To consult the statistician after an experiment is finished is often merely to ask him to conduct a post mortem examination. He can perhaps say what the experiment died of.” If a team tries to bring you in a data scientist launched an experiment, they may find the data doesn't exist to measure their key metric, the test is severely underpowered, or there's a design flaw that means you can't draw any conclusions. 

11) **Only include people in your analysis who could have been affected by the change**. https://onedrive.live.com/view.aspx?resid=8612090E610871E4!287400&ithint=file%2cdocx&app=Word&authkey=!AOW7nw7IZ4STtgk. 

### Resources

When I started at Etsy, I read a lot of papers and blog posts on A/B Testing. While I had strong background in statistics and experimentation, A/B Testing presents an additional set of problems. These are some of the ones that I found most helpful.  

- [Democraticizing online controlled experiments at Booking.com](https://arxiv.org/pdf/1710.08217.pdf): booking.com is definitely #goals of experimentation (they run more than 1,000 concurrent experiments at a time and have a team of 30), but this overview of their experimentation system provides you a great place to strive for. While you certainly won't be able to replicate everything they do, such as have two separate pipelines that compute experiment metrics, one in real-time and only daily, you can learn from their emphasis on building trust in the infrastructure and data quality, maintaining a pool of A/A experiments (where there's no difference) to surface issues, enforcing good practices of pre-registration and statistical checks.
- [From Infrastructure to Culture: A/B Testing Challenges in Large Scale Social Networks](https://content.linkedin.com/content/dam/engineering/site-assets/pdfs/ABTestingSocialNetwork_share.pdf): while the first section deals with the complications of overlapping experiments and social networks, the latter sections have great rules of thumbs for simplifying the multiple testing problem and allowing metric owners to follow other people's experiments that are impacting their metric. 
- [Online Experimentation at Microsoft](http://ai.stanford.edu/~ronnyk/ExPThinkWeek2009Public.pdf): an accessible overview of how Microsoft started A/B Testing, tackling the issues of how most experiments fail, how they spread awareness, and lessons learned. 
- [Controlled Experiments on the Web: Survey and Practical Guide](https://ai.stanford.edu/~ronnyk/2009controlledExperimentsOnTheWebSurvey.pdf): an essential guide to best practices, some of which are covered in my rules above. 
- [Seven Rules of Thumb for Web Site Experiments](https://www.exp-platform.com/Documents/2014%20experimentersRulesOfThumb.pdf): while the details can be complicated, the seven rules are clear: it's easy to increase clicks on a feature but not for the whole page, be critical of your "too good to be true" results, 

### Next Time 

I've been working at DataCamp for about four months now. One of the main reasons they hired me was to build out their experimentation system. It's a whole different set of challenges and mindset. I'll be giving a talk on it in October at the [Noreast'R conference](http://noreastrconf.com/). 
